The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of Astronomy, by George Forbes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: History of Astronomy

Author: George Forbes

Release Date: June 25, 2003 [EBook #8172]
[Most recently updated: March 21, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Dave Maddock, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




[Illustration: SIR ISAAC NEWTON
(From the bust by Roubiliac In Trinity College, Cambridge.)]




HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY
BY
GEORGE FORBES,
M.A., F.R.S., M. INST. C. E.,

(FORMERLY PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, ANDERSON’S
COLLEGE, GLASGOW)

AUTHOR OF “THE TRANSIT OF VENUS,” RENDU’S
“THEORY OF THE GLACIERS OF SAVOY,” ETC., ETC.




CONTENTS

 PREFACE

 BOOK I. THE GEOMETRICAL PERIOD
 1. PRIMITIVE ASTRONOMY AND ASTROLOGY
 2. ANCIENT ASTRONOMY—CHINESE AND CHALDÆANS
 3. ANCIENT GREEK ASTRONOMY
 4. THE REIGN OF EPICYCLES—FROM PTOLEMY TO COPERNICUS

 BOOK II. THE DYNAMICAL PERIOD
 5. DISCOVERY OF THE TRUE SOLAR SYSTEM—TYCHO BRAHE—KEPLER
 6. GALILEO AND THE TELESCOPE—NOTIONS OF GRAVITY BY HORROCKS, ETC.
 7. SIR ISAAC NEWTON—LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION
 8. NEWTON’S SUCCESSORS—HALLEY, EULER, LAGRANGE,
LAPLACE, ETC.
 9. DISCOVERY OF NEW PLANETS—HERSCHEL, PIAZZI, ADAMS,
AND LE VERRIER

 BOOK III. OBSERVATION
 10. INSTRUMENTS OF PRECISION—SIZE OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM
 11. HISTORY OF THE TELESCOPE—SPECTROSCOPE

 BOOK IV. THE PHYSICAL PERIOD
 12. THE SUN
 13. THE MOON AND PLANETS
 14. COMETS AND METEORS
 15. THE STARS AND NEBULÆ

 ILLUSTRATIONS
 INDEX




PREFACE


An attempt has been made in these pages to trace the evolution of
intellectual thought in the progress of astronomical discovery, and, by
recognising the different points of view of the different ages, to give
due credit even to the ancients. No one can expect, in a history of
astronomy of limited size, to find a treatise on “practical” or on
“theoretical astronomy,” nor a complete “descriptive astronomy,” and
still less a book on “speculative astronomy.” Something of each of
these is essential, however, for tracing the progress of thought and
knowledge which it is the object of this History to describe.

The progress of human knowledge is measured by the increased habit of
looking at facts from new points of view, as much as by the
accumulation of facts. The mental capacity of one age does not seem to
differ from that of other ages; but it is the imagination of new points
of view that gives a wider scope to that capacity. And this is
cumulative, and therefore progressive. Aristotle viewed the solar
system as a geometrical problem; Kepler and Newton converted the point
of view into a dynamical one. Aristotle’s mental capacity to understand
the meaning of facts or to criticise a train of reasoning may have been
equal to that of Kepler or Newton, but the point of view was different.

Then, again, new points of view are provided by the invention of new
methods in that system of logic which we call mathematics. All that
mathematics can do is to assure us that a statement A is equivalent to
statements B, C, D, or is one of the facts expressed by the statements
B, C, D; so that we may know, if B, C, and D are true, then A is true.
To many people our inability to understand all that is contained in
statements B, C, and D, without the cumbrous process of a mathematical
demonstration, proves the feebleness of the human mind as a logical
machine. For it required the new point of view imagined by Newton’s
analysis to enable people to see that, so far as planetary orbits are
concerned, Kepler’s three laws (B, C, D) were identical with Newton’s
law of gravitation (A). No one recognises more than the mathematical
astronomer this feebleness of the human intellect, and no one is more
conscious of the limitations of the logical process called mathematics,
which even now has not solved directly the problem of only three
bodies.

These reflections, arising from the writing of this History, go to
explain the invariable humility of the great mathematical astronomers.
Newton’s comparison of himself to the child on the seashore applies to
them all. As each new discovery opens up, it may be, boundless oceans
for investigation, for wonder, and for admiration, the great
astronomers, refusing to accept mere hypotheses as true, have founded
upon these discoveries a science as exact in its observation of facts
as in theories. So it is that these men, who have built up the most
sure and most solid of all the sciences, refuse to invite others to
join them in vain speculation. The writer has, therefore, in this short
History, tried to follow that great master, Airy, whose pupil he was,
and the key to whose character was exactness and accuracy; and he
recognises that Science is impotent except in her own limited sphere.

It has been necessary to curtail many parts of the History in the
attempt—perhaps a hopeless one—to lay before the reader in a limited
space enough about each age to illustrate its tone and spirit, the
ideals of the workers, the gradual addition of new points of view and
of new means of investigation.

It would, indeed, be a pleasure to entertain the hope that these pages
might, among new recruits, arouse an interest in the greatest of all
the sciences, or that those who have handled the theoretical or
practical side might be led by them to read in the original some of the
classics of astronomy. Many students have much compassion for the
schoolboy of to-day, who is not allowed the luxury of learning the art
of reasoning from him who still remains pre-eminently its greatest
exponent, Euclid. These students pity also the man of to-morrow, who is
not to be allowed to read, in the original Latin of the brilliant
Kepler, how he was able—by observations taken from a moving platform,
the earth, of the directions of a moving object, Mars—to deduce the
exact shape of the path of each of these planets, and their actual
positions on these paths at any time. Kepler’s masterpiece is one of
the most interesting books that was ever written, combining wit,
imagination, ingenuity, and certainty.

Lastly, it must be noted that, as a History of England cannot deal with
the present Parliament, so also the unfinished researches and untested
hypotheses of many well-known astronomers of to-day cannot be included
among the records of the History of Astronomy. The writer regrets the
necessity that thus arises of leaving without mention the names of many
who are now making history in astronomical work.

G. F.

_August_ 1_st_, 1909.




BOOK I. THE GEOMETRICAL PERIOD

1. PRIMITIVE ASTRONOMY AND ASTROLOGY.


The growth of intelligence in the human race has its counterpart in
that of the individual, especially in the earliest stages. Intellectual
activity and the development of reasoning powers are in both cases
based upon the accumulation of experiences, and on the comparison,
classification, arrangement, and nomenclature of these experiences.
During the infancy of each the succession of events can be watched, but
there can be no _à priori_ anticipations. Experience alone, in both
cases, leads to the idea of cause and effect as a principle that seems
to dominate our present universe, as a rule for predicting the course
of events, and as a guide to the choice of a course of action. This
idea of cause and effect is the most potent factor in developing the
history of the human race, as of the individual.

In no realm of nature is the principle of cause and effect more
conspicuous than in astronomy; and we fall into the habit of thinking
of its laws as not only being unchangeable in our universe, but
necessary to the conception of any universe that might have been
substituted in its place. The first inhabitants of the world were
compelled to accommodate their acts to the daily and annual
alternations of light and darkness and of heat and cold, as much as to
the irregular changes of weather, attacks of disease, and the fortune
of war. They soon came to regard the influence of the sun, in
connection with light and heat, as a cause. This led to a search for
other signs in the heavens. If the appearance of a comet was sometimes
noted simultaneously with the death of a great ruler, or an eclipse
with a scourge of plague, these might well be looked upon as causes in
the same sense that the veering or backing of the wind is regarded as a
cause of fine or foul weather.

For these reasons we find that the earnest men of all ages have
recorded the occurrence of comets, eclipses, new stars, meteor showers,
and remarkable conjunctions of the planets, as well as plagues and
famines, floods and droughts, wars and the deaths of great rulers.
Sometimes they thought they could trace connections which might lead
them to say that a comet presaged famine, or an eclipse war.

Even if these men were sometimes led to evolve laws of cause and effect
which now seem to us absurd, let us be tolerant, and gratefully
acknowledge that these astrologers, when they suggested such “working
hypotheses,” were laying the foundations of observation and deduction.

If the ancient Chaldæans gave to the planetary conjunctions an
influence over terrestrial events, let us remember that in our own time
people have searched for connection between terrestrial conditions and
periods of unusual prevalence of sun spots; while De la Rue, Loewy, and
Balfour Stewart[1] thought they found a connection between sun-spot
displays and the planetary positions. Thus we find scientific men, even
in our own time, responsible for the belief that storms in the Indian
Ocean, the fertility of German vines, famines in India, and high or low
Nile-floods in Egypt follow the planetary positions.

And, again, the desire to foretell the weather is so laud